# CUNY | SPS | Master of Science in Data Science – DATA 698 – Capstone Project 
## Can a GPT4-Powered AI Agent Be a Good Enough Performance Attribution Analyst?

Author: Bruno de Melo | bruno.verasdemelo27@spsmail.cuny.edu        
Advisor: Jamiel Sheikh | jamiel.sheikh@sps.cuny.edu

### Introduction
With the successful release of chatGPT in November 2022 and subsequent releases of similar open-source models, there has been increasing interest in applying large language models (LLM) to create AI systems or applications that are governed by AI agents. Theoretically, an AI agent can act, observe, generate tasks, and make specific decisions within a controlled environment in order to reach predetermined objectives or goals. Within the realm of LLMs, these agents can autonomously perform automation tasks such as code generation, personal assistance, information retrieval and summarization, etc. One of the main advantages of AI agents is the perceived increase in human productivity in that most of the mundane tasks could be automated, thus leaving us to think and do more creative tasks and jobs.

Open-source LLM application wrappers like LangChain  and LlamaIndex  offer quick and easy-to-use pre-canned AI Agents that can generate meaningful results with just a few lines of codes. These functions can be customized and might serve as a jump start for more ready-to-production applications. There are other open-source frameworks that allows for customized agent creation like Ai Agent , AgentGPT , and Superagent , to name a few. A recent commercial application is Microsoft’s 365 Copilot product, which integrates AI into its Office suite of products like Work, Excel, Teams. In Word, Copilot allows for draft creation, addition of new content to an existing document, rewriting of text, text summarization, etc.

There are various business processes that can benefit from the use of AI Agent, especially those processes that consume or produce structured data - which is commonly arranged in a way that is highly organized, easily manipulated, and understandable by machines, like tabular data. As opposed to unstructured data, typically found in books and research papers, structured data is typically found in relational databases and knowledge graph networks. Processes utilizing semi-structured data which serve as a bridge between structured and unstructured data, such as content produced in JSON or XML format, are also a clear beneficiary of the use of AI Agent.

Within the asset management industry, specifically in fund investing and portfolio management related activities, a business process that can be enhanced using AI agents relates to portfolio performance measurement and attribution. The measurement of portfolio performance versus a benchmark, or mostly commonly known as performance attribution analysis  is defined by Bacon (2008) as “a technique used to quantify the excess return of a portfolio against its benchmark into the active decisions of the investment decision process”.

Performance attribution analysis is an integral and important part of the investment decision process, providing added value in that it allows for independent and emotion-free feedback into the investment process, and serving as a transparent way for senior management and clients to identify sources of portfolio returns and risks. Ideally, the performance attribution team should be part of a risk control function, never reporting to the front office or the marketing department, as recommended by Bacon (2008). 

The performance attribution team employs specialized personnel with industry wide recognized certification programs such as the CIPM - Certificate in Investment Performance Measurement, managed by the CFA Institute . Moreover, it is based on established financial and mathematical foundation with a plethora of published academic research papers and books. Many commercial software solutions widely used by the financial industry incorporate such techniques as part of their offering, such as Factset and MSCI’s Barra.

Attribution analysis poses an interesting challenge to the use of an AI agent for several reasons, such as: i) it requires incorporating domain specific knowledge into LLMs, hence opening the possibility of fine-tuning and the use of Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) frameworks; ii) it involves reasoning on structured/tabular data which implies that LLMs have to be able to generate 100% accurate results, hence requiring the use of hallucination controls and evaluation methods; and iii) being a multi-dimensional, multi-temporal problem, it requires LLMs to reason and to provide insights using data from several columns before answering a query. We believe that an AI agent employed in this context could be a relatively cheap and complimentary tool in the toolbox of an experience performance attribution analyst in that it is a cost-effective way of reducing cognitive burden when analyzing multiple portfolios over multiple time scales, thus increasing their time to perform in-depth analysis, for example.
